# BimedialAxis
This repository includes custom functions that can be used to draw the medial cell axis

## Bivariate_medial_axis_estimation:
  The function *get_medial_axis* draws the central line of elongated (rod-shaped) cells from pole to pole. A set to test the medial axis estimation is also provided along with a notebook that demonstrates how the function works. The get_oned_coordinates function projects all the cell pixels onto the central line,
  in relative or absolute arch-length coordinates from pole to pole. The distance from the central line is multiplied by the sign of the cross product to get the 
  orientation of the cell pixels around the medial axis (above or below). An example for implementing the medial axis estimation is provided in the *test_medial_axis.ipynb* notebook.

  Cite:
    
    Nonequilibrium polysome dynamics promote chromosome segregation and its coupling to cell growth in Escherichia coli
    
    Alexandros Papagiannakis, Qiwei Yu, Sander K. Govers, Wei-Hsiang Lin,  Ned S. Wingreen, Christine Jacobs-Wagner
    
    eLife2025;14:RP104276 DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.104276.3


## Skeleton-assisted medial axis definition:
  The *skeleton_assisted_medial_axis.py* script includes the functions required to draw a medial axis based on the skeleton generated by the skeletonize skimage.morphology function.
  The medial axis operation is ran using the *skeleton_assisted_bivariate_axis* function. This is not simply the generated skeleton. It includes functions used to remove crossing cells, and also runs a scanning function that arranges the skeleton pixels from pole to pole, allowing for a bivariate fit. This is important for cells that curl and generate multiple y or x coordinates for each x and y coordinate. This function is mostly used for very thin cells such as spirochetes, where the skeleton generate by scikit-image runs exclusively through the cell length, and does not form "ribs" across the cell width.

